The Project Gutenberg eBook of Hawkins-Davison Houses, Frederica, St. Simons Island,
Georgia, by Margaret Davis Cate This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in
the United States and most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost
no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under
the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org . If you are not located in the United States, you will
have to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this
eBook. Title: Hawkins-Davison Houses, Frederica, St. Simons Island, Georgia
Author: Margaret Davis Cate Release Date: March 04, 2021 [eBook #64684]
Language: English Character set encoding: UTF-8 Produced by: Stephen Hutcheson
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net *** START
OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HAWKINS-DAVISON HOUSES, FREDERICA, ST. SIMONS
ISLAND, GEORGIA *** Hawkins-Davison Houses, Frederica HAWKINS-DAVISON HOUSES
FREDERICA St. Simons Island, Georgia Reprinted from THE GEORGIA HISTORICAL
QUARTERLY Vol. XL No. 3 Sept. 1956 Publication No. 2 FORT FREDERICA ASSOCIATION
203 The Original Houses of Frederica, Georgia: The Hawkins-Davison Houses By
Margaret Davis Cate[1] <#fn_1> The recent excavation of the building sites in
the old Town of Frederica has stirred interest in this now “Dead Town” and in
the fortification, Fort Frederica. Fort Frederica, located at a bluff on the
western shore of St. Simons Island, Georgia, and on the Inland Waterway, was
founded in 1736 by the British under the leadership of James Edward Oglethorpe,
as an outpost to protect the colony of Georgia and the other British possessions
to the north against the Spaniards in Florida. It became one of the most
expensive fortifications built by the British in America and the military
headquarters for a string of fortifications erected along this southern frontier
of Britain’s provinces in North America. The Town of Frederica, adjacent to the
fort, was settled by forty families brought here at that time. These settlers
built Fort Frederica and manned the fortifications until the coming of the
regiment of British soldiers two years later. Occupying about thirty-five
acres of land, the town was half a hexagon in shape, divided by Talbott Street,
generally called Broad Street, into two wards—North Ward and South Ward—and was
laid out into eighty-four lots, which were granted to the settlers and on which
they built their homes. About half a mile from Frederica, and surrounding the
town on three sides, were the garden lots while the fifty-acre tracts granted
the settlers were located in various parts of St. Simons Island. Later, a
larger area of safety being necessary, the entire town was fortified and
surrounded by a moat, the banks of which formed the ramparts of the town.
A wall of posts ten feet high, forming the stockade and palisade, flanked
both sides of the moat, with five-sided towers on the corner bastions. Entrance
into the town was through the Town Gate. 204 This old Town of Frederica was a
thriving community in its day. The streets were lined with houses, some built
of brick, some of tabby, and others of wood. John and Charles Wesley, founders
of Methodism, who came to Georgia in 1736 as missionaries of the Church of
England, were in charge of religious affairs. The town government consisted of
a magistrate, recorder, constables, and tythingmen. There were two taverns, an
apothecary shop, and numerous other shops and stores. The trades and
professions were represented by the hatter, tailor, dyer, weaver, tanner,
shoemaker, cordwainer, saddler, sawyer, woodcutter, carpenter, coachmaker,
bricklayer, pilot, surveyor, accountant, baker, brewer, tallow candler,
cooper, blacksmith, locksmith, brazier, miller, millwright, wheelwright,
husbandman, doctor, surgeon, midwife, Oglethorpe’s secretary, Keeper of the
King’s Stores, and officers of Oglethorpe’s Regiment. Frederica was a barracks
town, so that its business life was dependent on the money brought in by the
soldiers of the Regiment. After the British victory at Bloody Marsh and the
defeat of the enemy in the Spanish Invasion of 1742 (War of Jenkins’ Ear),
peace was made with Spain by the Treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle in 1748; and the
regiment of British soldiers was disbanded the following year. Having
gloriously achieved the purpose for which it was built, Frederica now became
a “Dead Town.” Gone were the soldiers who had given it life, followed by the
tradesmen and other settlers. The houses fell into decay, brick and tabby walls
tumbled, and fire took its toll. Much of the old brick and tabby was hauled
away and used in structures erected during the plantation era and, in time, no
evidence remained on the surface to show that these houses had ever existed.
Other families came, built their houses on these sites, and for generations
lived within the confines of the old town. Of the several buildings Oglethorpe
had erected within Fort Frederica the ruin of only one remained and this was
situated on the property of Mrs. Belle Stevens Taylor. In 1903, Mrs. Taylor,
through her friendship for Mrs. Georgia Page Wilder, President of the Georgia
Society of the Colonial Dames of America, gave to this Society the plot of 
ground on which stood this ruin, which the Colonial Dames repaired and saved 
for posterity.
